e entire imperial history of Britain can be periodised into two phases, the ‘first empire’ stretching across the Atlantic towards America and the West Indies, and the ‘second empire’ beginning around 1783 (Peace of Paris) and swinging towards the East—Asia and Africa. The imperial history of Britain started with the conquest of Ireland in the 16th century. The English then sprang up as the ‘new Romans
- ey resorted to aggressive application of the subsidiary alliance system to extend British dominion in India as a defensive counter measure against the imperialistic designs of France and Russia. From 1798 to 1818 the British motives were consciously imperialistic. Lord Hastings further carried the policy of Wellesley and treated India as a conquered rather than an acquired country. Thereafter, the Bri
- id the British Period Begin in India? In mid-18th-century India, various historical forces were at work, consequent to which the country moved towards a new direction. Some historians regard the year 1740, when the Anglo-French struggle for supremacy in India began in the wake of the War of Austrian Succession in Europe, as the beginning of the British period. Some see the year 1757, when the British 
- defeated the Nawab of Bengal at Plassey, as the designated date. Still others regard 1761, the year of the Third Battle of Panipat when the Marathas were defeated by Ahmad Shah Abdali, as the beginning of this phase of Indian history. However, all such chronological landmarks are somewhat
-  arbitrary because the political transformation which began around that time took about eighty years to complete. For instance, as we think of 1761, the British would certainly come to mind (because of their victory over the Nawab of Bengal at Plassey and over the French) but we would not entirely write off the Marathas and would probably also c
- handicrafts, etc. The English East India Company had vital commercial interests in trading in Bengal, as nearly 60 per cent of the British imports from Asia consisted of goods from Bengal. During the 1630s, regular contact of the British with Bengal continued when they established factories in Balasore, Hooghly, Kasimbazar, Patna, and Dacca. By the 1690s, the foundation of Calcutta by the English comp
- y paid a sum of Rs 3,000 (£ 350) per annum to the Mughal emperor who allowed them to trade freely in Bengal. In contrast, the Company’s exports from Bengal were worth more than £ 50,000 per annum. In 1700, Murshid Quli Khan became the Dewan of Bengal and ruled till his death in 1727. He was succeeded by his son-in-law, Shujauddin, who ruled till 1739. After that, for a year (1739–40), Sarfaraz Khan, a
- n incapable son of Murshid Quli Khan, became the ruler; he was killed by Alivardi Khan. Alivardi Khan ruled till 1756 and also stopped paying tributes to the Mughal emperor. Under the rule of these rulers, Bengal made unprecedented progress. There were other factors too, which made Bengal prosperous, for  
- vasions, Jat revolts, and external invasions by Nadir Shah and Ahmed Shah Abdali. The region of Bengal was fortunate enough to escape these challenges. The population of Calcutta rose from 15,000 (in 1706) to 100,000 (in 1750), and other cities like Dacca and Murshidabad became highly populous. Almost all the governors of Bengal strongly resented the special privileges enjoyed by the English company a
- oss to the provincial exchequer. So, the friction between the English commercial interests and the Bengal government became the chief cause for conflict between the two. During a short period between 1757 and 1765, the power gradually got transferred from the Nawabs of Bengal to the British, with the latter defeating the former. Alivardi Khan and the English In 1741, Alivardi Khan, the Deputy Governor
- di Khan’s apprehensions were drawn to the Carnatic region, where the European companies had usurped all power; on realising this, he was urged to expel the Europeans from Bengal. But he died in April 1756 and was succeeded by his grandson, Siraj-ud-Daulah, the son of Alivardi’s youngest daughter. Challenges Before Siraj-ud-Daulah A youth just in his twentieth year, Siraj inherited many troubles from h
-  reward the Company for its services. The secret alliance of the Company with the conspirators further strengthened the English position. So, the English victory in the Battle of Plassey (June 23, 1757) was decided before the battle was even fought. Due to the conspiracy of the nawab’s officials, the 50,000-strong force of Siraj was defeated by a handful of Clive’s forces. Siraj-ud-Daulah was captu
- dependent for maintaining his newly acquired position. The sovereignty of the English over Calcutta was recognised, and the English posted a resident at the nawab’s court. Mir Kasim and the Treaty of 1760 Mir Jafar was increasingly irritated by the interference of Clive. He entered into a conspiracy with the Dutch at Chinsura. But the Dutch were defeated and humbled by the English forces at Bedara in 
- November 1759. The treachery of Mir Jafar and his failure to make the payments due to the Company, annoyed the English. Meanwhile, Miran, the son of Jafar died and there started a fight for the nawabship of Bengal
-  agreed to support Mir Kasim’s claim after a treaty between Mir Kasim and the Company was signed in 1760. Important features of the treaty were as follows: (i) Mir Kasim agreed to cede to the Company the districts of Burdwan, Midnapur, and Chittagong. (ii) The Company would get half of the share in chun
- sted against this and insisted upon having preferential treatment as against other traders. The Nawab-Company tussle over transit duty led to the outbreak of wars between the English and Mir Kasim in 1763. The English gained successive victories at Katwah, Murshidabad, Giria, Sooty, and Munger. Mir Kasim fled to Awadh (or Oudh) and formed a confederacy with the Nawab of Awadh, Shuja-ud-Daulah, and the
- recover Bengal from the English. The Battle The combined armies of Mir Kasim, the Nawab of Awadh, and Shah Alam II were defeated by the English forces under Major Hector Munro at Buxar on October 22, 1764 in a closely contested battle. The English campaign against Mir Kasim was short but decisive. The importance of this battle lay in the fact that not only the Nawab of Bengal but also the Mughal Emper
- a was defeated by the English. The victory made the English a great power in northern India and contenders for the supremacy over the whole country. After the battle, Mir Jafar, who was made Nawab in 1763 when relations between Mir Kasim and the Company became strained, agreed to hand over the districts of  
-  administration lay in the hands of the naib-subahdar, who could be appointed or dismissed by the English. The Treaty of Allahabad Robert Clive concluded two important treaties at Allahabad in August 1765—one with the Nawab of Awadh and the other with the Mughal Emperor, Shah Alam II. Nawab Shuja-ud-Daula agreed to: (i) surrender Allahabad and Kara to Emperor Shah Alam II; (ii) pay Rs 50 lakh to the C
- erence to Robert Clive, who joined the army after resigning from a clerk’s post. He was instrumental in laying the foundations of British power in India. He was made the Governor of Bengal twice from 1757 to 1760 and then from 1765 to 1767. He administered Bengal under the dual government system till his return to England where he allegedly committed suicide in 1774.  
-  emperor’s farman legalised the political gains of the Company in Bengal. Mir Kasim, the dethroned Nawab of Bengal, spent the rest of his life in abject misery as a homeless wanderer and died in June 1777. Dual Government in Bengal (1765–72) After the battle of Buxar, the East India Company became the real masters of Bengal. Robert Clive introduced the dual system of government, i.e., the rule of the 
- dministrative breakdown and proved disastrous for the people of Bengal. Neither the Company nor the Nawab cared for administration and public welfare. Warren Hastings did away with the dual system in 1772.  
-  Mysore’s Resistance to the Company The Wodeyar / Mysore Dynasty After the battle of Talikota (1565) gave a deadly blow to the great kingdom of Vijayanagara, many small kingdoms emerged from its remnants. In 1612 a Hindu kingdom under the Wodeyars emerged in the region of Mysore. Chikka Krishnaraja
-  Wodeyar II ruled from 1734 to 1766. During the second half of the 18th century, Mysore emerged as a formidable power under the leadership of Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan. The English felt their political and commercial interests in Sout
- er Madras. Rise of Haidar Ali In the early 18th century two brothers, Nanjaraj (the sarvadhikari) and Devaraj (the Dulwai) had reduced Chikka Krishnaraja Wodeyar to a mere puppet. Haidar Ali, born in 1721 in an obscure family, started his career as a horseman in the Mysore army under the ministers, Nanjaraj and Devaraj. Views Whether regarded as a duel between the foreigner and the native, or as an ev
-  The need of the hour was a leader with high degree of military powers and diplomatic skill. Haidar Ali fulfilled that need and usurped the royal authority by becoming the de facto ruler of Mysore in 1761. He realised that the exceedingly mobile Marathas could be contained only by a swift cavalry, that the cannons of the French-trained Nizami army could be silenced only by an effective artillery, and 
- training for his army. He also started to use his considerable diplomatic skill to outmanoeuvre his opponents. With his superior military skill, he captured Dod Ballapur, Sera, Bednur, and Hoskote in 1761–63, and brought to submission the troublesome Poligars of South India (in what is now Tamil Nadu). Recovering from their defeat at Panipat, the Marathas under Madhavrao attacked Mysore, and defeated 
- Haidar Ali in 1764, 1766, and 1771. To buy peace, Haidar Ali had to give them large sums of money, but after Madhavrao’s death in 1772, Haidar Ali raided the Marathas a number of times during 1774–76 and recovered all the territories he had previously lost, besides capturing new areas. First Anglo-Mysore War (1767-69) Background After their easy success in Bengal, the English were confident of
-  their military strength. They concluded a treaty with the Nizam of Hyderabad (1766), persuading him to give them the Northern Circars (region) in lieu of which they said they would protect the Nizam from Haidar Ali. Haidar already had territorial disputes with the Nawab of Arcot an
- r changed his strategy and suddenly appeared before the gates of Madras. There was complete chaos and panic at Madras forcing the English to conclude a very humiliating treaty with Haidar on April 4, 1769—the Treaty of Madras. The treaty provided for the exchange of prisoners and mutual restitution of conquests. Haidar Ali was promised the help of the English in case he was attacked by any other power
- . Second Anglo-Mysore War (1780–84) Background Haidar Ali accused the English of breach of faith and nonobservance of the Treaty of Madras when in 1771 he was attacked by the Marathas, and the English failed to come to his aid. Also, he found that the French were much more helpful than the English in meeting his army’s requirement of guns, saltpetre
-  Colonel Baillie in 1781. In the meantime, the English (under Sir Eyre Coote) detached both the Marathas and the Nizam from Haidar’s side, but the undeterred Haidar faced the English boldly only to suffer a defeat at Porto N
- ovo in November 1781. However, he regrouped his forces and defeated the English and captured their commander, Braithwaite. Treaty of Mangalore Haidar Ali died of cancer on December 7, 1782. Now his son, Tipu Sultan, carried on the war for one year without any positive outcome. Fed up with an inconclusive war, both sides opted for peace, negotiating the Treaty of Mangalore (March, 1784)
- e had purchased Jalkottal and Cannanore from the Dutch in the Cochin state. As Cochin was a feudatory of Tipu, he considered the act of Travancore as a violation of his sovereign rights. So, in April 1790, Tipu declared war against Travancore for the restoration of his rights. Course of War The English, siding with Travancore, attacked Tipu. In 1790, Tipu defeated the English under General Meadows. In
-  1791, Cornwallis took the leadership and at the head of a large army marched through Ambur and Vellore to Bangalore (captured in March 1791) and from there to Seringapatam. Coimbatore fell to them, but they lost it again, and at last with the support of the Marathas and the Nizam, the English attacked Seringapatam for the second time. Ti
- pu offered serious opposition, but the odds were against him. Consequently, he had to pay heavily under the Treaty of Seringapatam. Treaty of Seringapatam Under this treaty of 1792, nearly half of the Mysorean territory was taken over by the victors. Baramahal, Dindigul, and Malabar went to the English, while the Marathas got the regions surrounding the Tungabhadra and its trib
-  while the rest was to be given in installments, for which Tipu’s two sons were taken as hostages by the English. Fourth Anglo-Mysore War Background The English as well as Tipu Sultan used the period 1792 to 1799 to recoup their losses. Tipu fulfilled all the terms of the Treaty of Seringapatam and got his sons released. In 1796, when the Hindu ruler of Wodeyar dynasty died, Tipu refused to place Wode
- yar’s minor son on the throne and declared himself sultan. He also decided to avenge his humilitating defeat and the terms put by the Treaty of Seringapatam. In 1798, Lord Wellesley succeeded Sir John Shore as the new governor general. An imperialist to the core, Wellesley was concerned about Tipu’s growing friendship with the French and aimed at annihilating Tip
- ghanistan, Kabul, and Zaman Shah, as also to Isle of France (Mauritius) and Versailles, with treasonable intent. Tipu’s explanation did not satisfy Wellesley. Course of War The war began on April 17, 1799 and ended on May 4, 1799 with the fall of Seringapatam. Tipu was defeated first by English General Stuart and then by General Harris. Arthur Wellesley, the brother of Lord Wellesley, also participate
-  Estimate of Tipu Sultan Tipu Sultan was born in November 1750 to Haidar Ali and Fatima. A well-educated man, he could freely converse in Arabic, Persian, Kanarese, and Urdu. Tipu was a great warrior (he was known as the ‘Tiger of Mysore’) and gave maximum care 
- ough he took the help of the French officers to train his soldiers, he never allowed them (French) to develop into a pressure group. Like his father, Tipu realised the importance of a naval force. In 1796, he set up a Board of Admiralty and planned for a fleet of 22 battleships and 20 large frigates. Three dockyards were established at Mangalore, Wajedabad, and Molidabad. However, his plans did not fr
- er in introducing sericulture to the Mysore State. Tipu was a great lover of democracy and a great diplomat. He gave his support to the French soldiers at Seringapatam in setting up a Jacobin Club in 1797. He ordered a salute of 2,300 cannons and 500 rockets to celebrate the occasion. Tipu himself became a member of the Jacobin Club and allowed himself to be called Citizen Tipu. He planted the Tree of
- cted Hindu temples within his own kingdom. He sanctioned funds for the repair of the Sringeri Temple and installation of the idol of Goddess Sarada (the idol had been damaged during a Maratha raid in 1791). It is necessary not to judge characters of the past with modern yardsticks of secularism and democracy. Tipu despised the use of palanquins and described them as fit only for use of women and the d
- Coimbatore, Dwaraporam, and Seringapatam. ● The new state of Mysore was handed over to the old Hindu dynasty (Wodeyars) under a minor ruler Krishnaraja III, who accepted the subsidiary alliance. ● In 1831, William Bentinck took control of Mysore on grounds of misgovernance. ● In 1881, Lord Ripon restored the kingdom to its ruler. Views Tipu has been regarded by some writers as the first Indian nationa
- dle of the 18th century, they were in Lahore thinking of becoming rulers of the North Indian empire and in the court of the Mughals playing the role of kingmakers. Though the Third Battle of Panipat (1761), in which they were defeated by Ahmad Shah Abdali, changed the situation, they regrouped, regained their strength, and, within a decade, achieved a position of power in India. Bajirao I (1720–40), c
- e of Nagpur; (iii) the Holkars of Indore; (iv) the Sindhias of Gwalior; and (v) the Peshwa of Poona. The confederacy, under Bajirao I to Madhavrao I, worked cordially but the Third Battle of Panipat (1761) changed everything. The defeat at Panipat and later the death of the young Peshwa, Madhavrao I, in 1772, weakened the control of the Peshwas over the confederacy. Though the chiefs of the confederac
- y united on occasion, as against the British (1775–82), more often they quarrelled among themselves. Entry of the English into Maratha Politics The years between the last quarter of the 18th century and the first quarter of the 19th century witnessed
- es of the arrangement made by Clive in Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa. So, it was a longed-for opportunity for the English when dissensions over a succession divided the Marathas. First Anglo-Maratha War (1775–82) Background After the death of Madhavrao in 1772, his brother Narayanrao succeeded him as the fifth peshwa. However, Narayanrao’s uncle, Raghunathrao, had his nephew assassinated and named himself
-  peshwa and rule for him as regents. Treaties of Surat and Purandhar Raghunathrao, unwilling to give up his position in power, sought help from the English at Bombay and signed the Treaty of Surat in 1775. Under the treaty, Raghunathrao ceded the territories of Salsette and Bassein to the English along with a portion of the revenues from Surat and Bharuch districts. In return, the English were to prov
- ide Raghunathrao with 2,500 soldiers. The British Calcutta Council, on the other side of India, condemned the Treaty of Surat (1775) and sent Colonel Upton to Pune to annul it and make a new treaty (Treaty of Purandhar, 1776) with the regency renouncing Raghunath and promising him a pension. The Bombay government rejected this an
- d gave refuge to Raghunath. In 1777, Nana Phadnavis violated his treaty with the Calcutta Council by granting the French a port on the west coast. The English retaliated by sending a force towards Pune.  
-  forcing them to retreat to the village of Wadgaon. Here, the English army was surrounded on all sides by the Marathas and cut off from food and water supplies. The English surrendered by mid-January 1779 and signed the Treaty of Wadgaon that forced the Bombay government to relinquish all territories acquired by the English since 1775. Treaty of Salbai (1782): End of the First Phase of the Struggle Wa
- rren Hastings, the Governor General in Bengal, rejected the Treaty of Wadgaon and sent a large force of soldiers under Colonel Goddard, who captured Ahmedabad in February 1779, and Bassein in December 1780. Another Bengal detachment led by Captain Popham captured Gwalior in August 1780. In February 1781, the English, under General Camac, finally defeated Sindhia at Sipri. 
- Sindhia proposed a new treaty between the Peshwa and the English, and the Treaty of Salbai was signed in May 1782; it was ratified by Hastings in June 1782 and by Phadnavis in February 1783. The treaty guaranteed peace between the two sides for twenty years. The main provisions of the Treaty of Salbai were: (i) Salsette should continue in the possession of the English. (ii) The whole of
-  the territory conquered since the Treaty of Purandhar (1776), including Bassein, should be restored to the Marathas. (iii) In Gujarat, Fateh Singh Gaekwad should remain in possession of the territory which he had before the war and should serve the Peshwa as 
-  that their several allies should remain at peace with one another. (ix) Mahadji Scindia should be the mutual guarantor for the proper observance of the terms of the treaty. Second Anglo-Maratha War (1803–05) Background The Second Anglo-Maratha war started in circumstances similar to those of the first. After Peshwa Madhavrao Narayan committed suicide in 1795, Bajirao II, the worthless son of Raghunat
- vis, a bitter foe of Bajirao II, became the chief minister. The dissensions among the Marathas provided the English with an opportunity to intervene in Maratha affairs. The death of Nana Phadnavis in 1800 gave the British an added advantage. Course of War On April 1, 1801, the Peshwa brutally murdered the brother of Jaswantrao (also called Yashwantrao by some historians) Holkar, Vithuji. A furious Jas
- want arrayed his forces against the combined armies of Scindia and Bajirao II. The turmoil continued, and on October 25, 1802, Jaswant defeated the armies of the Peshwa and Scindia decisively at Hadapsar near Poona and placed Vinayakrao, son of Amritrao, on the Peshwa’s seat. A terrified Bajirao II fled to Bassein where, on
-  December 31, 1802, he signed a treaty with the English. Treaty of Bassein (1802) Under the treaty, the Peshwa agreed: (i) to receive from the Company a native infantry (consisting of not less than 6,000 troops), with the usual proportion of field artillery and European artillery
- ell-prepared and organised army of the English under Arthur Wellesley defeated the combined armies of Scindia and Bhonsle and forced them to conclude separate subsidiary treaties with the English. In 1804, Yashwantrao Holkar made an attempt to form a coalition of Indian rulers to fight against the English. But his attempt proved unsuccessful. The Marathas were defeated, reduced to British vassalage an
- d isolated from one another. [(i) Defeat of Bhonsle (December 17, 1803, Treaty of Deogaon); (ii) Defeat of Scindia (December 30, 1803, Treaty of Surji-Anjangaon); and (iii) Defeat of Holkar (1806, Treaty of Rajpurghat)]. Significance of the Treaty of Bassein Admittedly, the treaty was signed by a Peshwa who lacked political authority, but the gains made by the English were immense. The provis
-  Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817–19) Background Lord Hastings had the imperialistic design of imposing British paramountcy. By the Charter Act of 1813, the East India Company’s monopoly of trade in China (except tea) ended and, hence, the company needed more markets. The Pindaris, made up of many castes and classes, were attached to Maratha armies 
-  actions taken against the Pindaris were seen as a transgression of the sovereignty of the Marathas; they served to once again unite the Maratha confederacy. A repentant Bajirao II made a last bid in 1817 by rallying together the Maratha chiefs against the English in course of the Third Anglo-Maratha War. Course of War The Peshwa attacked the British Residency at Poona. Appa Sahib of Nagpur attacked t
- o exert his authority again on the Maratha confederacy. Result The Peshwa was defeated at Khirki, Bhonsle at Sitabuldi, and Holkar at Mahidpur. Some important treaties were signed. These were: ● June 1817, Treaty of Poona, with Peshwa. ● November 1817, Treaty of Gwalior, with Scindia. ● January 1818, Treaty of Mandasor, with Holkar. In June 1818, the Peshwa finally surrendered and the Maratha confeder
- er a few pushes. Conquest of Sindh In the early 19th century, the English started to show an interest in Sindh where they enjoyed some trade facilities authorised by a farman of the Mughal Emperor in 1630. The farman provided the English with such privileges in the ports of Sindh which they enjoyed elsewhere. Rise of Talpuras Amirs In the 18th century, prior to the rule of Talpuras Amirs, Sindh was ru
- led by the Kallora chiefs. In 1758, an English factory was built at Thatta, owing to a parwana given by the Kallora prince, Ghulam Shah. In 1761, Ghulam Shah, on the arrival of an English resident in his court, not only ratified the earlier treaty, but also excluded other Europeans from trading there. This advantage was enjoyed by the English
-  up to 1775 when a not-too-friendly ruler, Sarfraz Khan, made the English close their factory. In the 1770s, a Baluch tribe called Talpuras, descended from the hills and settled in the plains of Sindh. They were excellent soldiers as well as adapted to hard life. They acquired great influence and soon usu
- rped power in the new region. In 1783, the Talpuras, under the leadership of Mir Fath (Fatah) Ali Khan, established complete hold over Sindh and sent the Kallora prince into exile. The then Durrani monarch confirmed the claims of Mir Fat
- h Khan and ordered the latter to share the country with his brothers (Mir’s brothers, popularly known as ‘Char Yar’). When Mir Fath died in 1800, the Char Yar divided the kingdom among themselves, calling themselves the Amirs or Lords of Sindh. These amirs extended their dominion on all sides. They conquered Amarkot from the Raja of Jodhpur, 
-  chief of Luz, and Shaikarpur and Bukkar from the Afghans. Gradual Ascendancy over Sindh A common belief in the late 18th century was that Napoleon was conspiring with Tipu Sultan to invade India. In 1799, behind Lord Wellesley’s efforts to revive commercial relations  
- h. Negotiations were opened with Fath Ali Khan. But under the influence of Tipu Sultan and the jealousy of the local traders, aided by the anti-British party at Hyderabad (Sindh), the amir in October 1800, ordered the British agent to quit Sindh within ten days. The British agent (Crow) left Sindh and the Company quietly suffered the insult. Treaty of ‘Eternal Friendship’ In June 1807, the alliance of
- eir first-ever treaty with the English. After professing eternal friendship, both sides agreed to exclude the French from Sindh and to exchange agents at each other’s court. The treaty was renewed in 1820, with the addition of an article excluding the Americans and resolving some border disputes on the side of Kachch after the final defeat of the Maratha confederacy in 1818. Treaty of 1832 In 1832, Wi
- ur to put down the robbers of Kachch. (v) The old treaties were confirmed and the parties would not be jealous of each other. Lord Auckland and Sindh Lord Auckland, who became the Governor General in 1836, looked at Sindh from the perspective of saving India from a possible Russian invasion and wished to obtain a counteracting influence over the Afghans. Ranjit Singh in Punjab was strong enough to res
- be kept in the capital at the Amir’s expense or alternatively the English would be given suitable concessions in return. The Amirs initially refused but later agreed reluctantly to sign the treaty in 1838 when the possibility of Ranjit Singh getting help from others was pointed out to them. The treaty permitted the English to intervene in the disputes between the Amirs and the Sikhs as also to establi
- sh the presence of a British resident who could go anywhere he liked escorted by English troops. Thus, Sindh was turned into a British protectorate in 1838. Tripartite Treaty of 1838 To address the Afghan problem (as the British imagined it), the Company resorted to further duplicity. Firstly, they persuaded Ranjit Singh to sign a tripartite treaty in June 1838 agreeing to Britis
- ve was to obtain finances for the Afghan adventure and obtain so much of the Amirs’ territory as would secure a line of operation against Afghanistan through Sindh. Sindh Accepts Subsidiary Alliance (1839) The Company intended to persuade or compel the Amirs to pay the money and also to consent to the abrogation of that article in the treaty of 1832, which prohibited the movement of English troops in 
- Sindh by land or by river. B.L. Grover writes: “Under threat of superior force, the Amirs accepted a treaty in February 1839 by which a British subsidiary force had to be stationed at Shikarpur and Bukkar and the Amirs of Sindh were to pay Rs 3 lakh annually for the maintenance of the Company’s troops.” Henceforth, the Ami
- Company’s military supplies, besides abolishing all tolls on the Indus, and furnishing an auxiliary force for the Afghan war if called upon to do so. Capitulation of Sindh The first Anglo-Afghan War (1839–42), fought on the soil of Sindh, was never liked by the Amirs of Sindh; neither did they like the presence of the British troops in their region. However, under the treaty they were asked to pay for
-  were made captives and banished from Sindh. In 1843, under Governor General Ellenborough, Sindh was merged into the British Empire and Charles Napier was appointed its first governor. Criticisms of the Conquest of Sindh Historians generally condemn th
- ab under the Sikhs After the murder of the last Sikh guru, Guru Gobind Singh, a section of Sikhs under the leadership of Banda Bahadur revolted against the Mughals during the rule of Bahadur Shah. In 1715, Banda Bahadur was defeated by Farrukhsiyar and put to death in 1716. Thus, the Sikh polity, once again, became Views We have no right to seize Sindh, yet we shall do so, and a very advantageous, use
-  leaderless and later got divided into two groups—Bandai (Liberal) and Tat Khalsa (Orthodox). This rift among the followers ended in 1721 under the influence of Bhai Mani Singh. Later, in 1784, Kapur Singh Faizullapuria organised the Sikhs under Dal Khalsa, with the objective of uniting followers of Sikhism, politically, culturally, and economically. The whole body of the Khalsa was formed
- er. The Sikhs consolidated in misls, which were military brotherhoods with a democratic set-up. Misl is an Arabic word which means equal or alike. Another meaning of Misl is State. During the period, 1763 to 1773, many misls started to rule the Punjab region under Sikh chieftains, from Saharanpur in the east to Attock in the west, from the mountaineous regions of the north to Multan in the south. Suka
- rchakiya Misl and Ranjit Singh At the time of the birth of Ranjit Singh (November 2, 1780), there were 12 important misls—Ahluwaliya, Bhangi, Dallewalia, Faizullapuria, Kanhaiya, Krorasinghia, Nakkai, Nishaniya, Phulakiya, Ramgarhiya Sukharchakiya, and Shaheed. The central administration 
- cades. These events in the neighbouring regions were fully exploited by Ranjit Singh, who followed a ruthless policy of ‘blood and iron’ and carved out for himself a kingdom in the central Punjab. In 1799, Ranjit Singh was appointed as the governor of Lahore by  
-  Zaman Shah, the ruler of Afghanistan. In 1805, Ranjit Singh acquired Jammu and Amritsar, and, thus, the political capital (Lahore) and religious capital (Amritsar) of Punjab came under the rule of Ranjit Singh. He also maintained good relations 
- th the Dogras and the Nepalese and enlisted them in his army. Ranjit Singh and the English The prospects of a joint Franco-Russian invasion of India through the land-route had alarmed the English. In 1807, Lord Minto sent Charles Metcalfe to Lahore. Ranjit Singh offered to accept Metcalfe’s proposal of an offensive and defensive alliance on the condition that the English would remain neutral in case o
-  the negotiations failed. In the changed political scenario in which the Napoleonic danger receded and the English became more assertive, Ranjit Singh agreed to sign the Treaty of Amritsar (April 25, 1809) with the Company. Treaty of Amritsar The Treaty of Amritsar was significant for its immediate as well as potential effects. It checked one of the most cherished ambitions of Ranjit Singh to extend h
- is rule over the entire Sikh nation by accepting the river Sutlej as the boundary line for his dominions and the Company’s. Now he directed his energies towards the west and captured Multan (1818), Kashmir (1819), and Peshawar (1834). In June 1838, Ranjit Singh was compelled by political compulsions to sign the Tripartite Treaty with the English; however, he refused to give passage to the Bri
- tish army through his territories to attack Dost Mohammad, the Afghan Amir. The relations of Raja Ranjit Singh with the Company, from 1809 to 1839, clearly indicate the former’s weak position. Although he was conscious of his weak position, he took no step to organise a coalition of other Indian princes or maintain a balance of power. Ranjit Si
- ngh died in June 1839, and, with his death, the process of the decline of his empire began.  
- ourt Factions Ranjit Singh’s only legitimate son and successor, Kharak Singh, was not efficient, and during the brief period of his reign, court factions became active. Kharak Singh’s sudden death in 1839 and the accidental death of his son, Prince Nau Nihal Singh (when he was returning from his father’s funeral), led to an anarchic situation in Punjab. Plans and counter plans of various groups to cap
- sulted in commotion and economic dislocation in Punjab. Rani Jindal and Daleep Singh After the death of Nau Nihal Singh, Sher Singh, another son of Ranjit Singh succeeded, but he was murdered in late 1843. Soon afterwards, Daleep Singh, a minor son of Ranjit Singh, was proclaimed the Maharaja with Rani Jindan as regent and Hira Singh Dogra as wazir. Hira Singh himself fell a victim to a court intrigue
-  and was murdered in 1844. The new wazir, Jawahar Singh, the brother of Rani Jindan, soon incurred the displeasure of the army and was deposed and put to death in 1845. Lal Singh, a lover of Rani Jindan, won over the army to his side and became the wazir in the same year, and Teja Singh was appointed as the commander of the forces. First Anglo-Sikh War (1845–46) Ca
-  Sutlej on December 11, 1845. This was seen as an aggressive manoeuvre that provided the English with the justification to declare war. The causes were, however, much more complex and may be listed as follows: (i) the anarchy in
-  the court at Lahore and the ever-powerful and increasingly local army; (ii) suspicions amongst the Sikh army arising from English military campaigns to achieve the annexation of Gwalior and Sindh in 1841 and the campaign in Afghanistan in 1842; and (iii) the increase in the number of English troops being stationed near the border with the Lahore kingdom. Course of War The war began in December 1845, 
- ish side, while the Sikhs had about 50,000 men under the overall command of Lal Singh. But the treachery of Lal Singh and Teja Singh caused five successive defeats to the Sikhs at Mudki (December 18, 1845), Ferozeshah (December 21–22, 1845), Buddelwal, Aliwal (January 28, 1846), and at Sobraon (February 10, 1846). Lahore fell to the British forces on February 20, 1846 without a fight. Treaty of Lahore
-  (March 8, 1846) The end of the first Anglo-Sikh War forced the Sikhs to sign a humiliating treaty on March 8, 1846. The main features of the Treaty of Lahore were as follows: ● War indemnity of more than 1 crore rupees was to be given to the English. ● The Jalandhar Doab (between the Beas and the Sutlej) was anne
-  and he was required to pay 75 lakh rupees to the Company as the price. The transfer of Kashmir to Gulab Singh was formalised by a separate treaty on March 16, 1846. Treaty of Bhairowal The Sikhs were not satisfied with the Treaty of Lahore over the issue of Kashmir, so they rebelled. In December, 1846, the Treaty of Bhairowal was signed. According to the provis
- Rani Jindan was removed as regent and a council of regency for Punjab was set up. The council consisted of 8 Sikh sardars presided over by the English Resident, Henry Lawrence. Second Anglo-Sikh War (1848–49) Causes The defeat in the first Anglo-Sikh War and the provisions of the treaties of Lahore and Bhairowal were highly humiliating for the Sikhs. Inhuman treatment meted out to Rani Jindan, who was
- were fought before the final annexation of Punjab. These three battles were: (i) Battle of Ramnagar, led by Sir Hugh Gough, the commander-in-chief of the Company (ii) Battle of Chillhanwala, January, 1849 (iii) Battle of Gujarat, February 21, 1849; the Sikh army surrendered at Rawalpindi, and their Afghan allies were chased out of India. (Gujarat is a small town on the banks of River Jhelum.)  
-  Result At the end of the war came: ● surrender of the Sikh army and Sher Singh in 1849; ● annexation of Punjab; and for his services the Earl of Dalhousie was given the thanks of the British Parliament and a promotion in the peerage, as Marquess; ● setting up of a three-member board to
-  govern Punjab, comprising of the Lawrence brothers (Henry and John) and Charles Mansel. In 1853, the board was nullified and Punjab was placed under a chief commissioner. John Lawrence became the first chief commissioner. Significance of the Anglo-Sikh Wars The Anglo-Sikh wars gave the two side
- s a mutual respect for each other’s fighting prowess. The Sikhs were to fight loyally on the British side in the Revolt of 1857 and in many other campaigns and wars uptil the Indian independence in 1947. Extension of British Paramountcy Through Administrative Policy The process of imperial expansion and consolidation of British paramountcy was carried on by the Company during the 1757–1857 period th
- ought to reduce the Indian states into a position of dependence on the British government. Subsidiary Alliance The subsidiary alliance system was used by Lord Wellesley, who was governor general from 1798–1805, to build an empire in India. Under the system, the allying Indian state’s ruler was compelled to accept the permanent stationing of a British force within his territory and to pay a subsidy for
- the system to various Indian states and brought it to near perfection. The first Indian state to fall into this protection trap (which anticipated the subsidiary alliance system) was Awadh, which, in 1765, signed a treaty under which the Company pledged to defend the frontiers of Awadh on the condition of the Nawab defraying the expenses of such defence. It was in 1787 that the Company first insisted 
- that the subsidiary state should not have foreign relations. This was included in the treaty with the Nawab of Carnatic which Cornwallis signed in February 1787. It was Wellesley’s genius to make it a general rule to negotiate for the surrender of territory in full sovereignty for the maintenance of the subsidiary force.  
- eaty) to initiate, sustain, and hasten the process of eventual annexation. States which Accepted Alliance The Indian princes who accepted the subsidiary system were: the Nizam of Hyderabad (September 1798 and 1800), the ruler of Mysore (1799), the ruler of Tanjore (October 1799), the Nawab of Awadh (November 1801), the Peshwa (December 1801), the Bhonsle Raja of Berar (December 1803), the Scindia (Feb
- ruary 1804), the Rajput states of Jodhpur, Jaipur, Macheri, Bundi, and the ruler of Bharatpur (1818). The Holkars were the last Maratha confederation to accept the Subsidiary Alliance in 1818.  
-  Views A 1950 Colonial Office paper disarmingly says that Britain ‘as a seafaring and trading nation... had long been a “collector of islands and peninsulas”’. In a much-quoted remark, Sir John Seeley, the Regius 
- Professor of Modern History at Cambridge, said something similar in 1883: ‘We seem, as it were, to have conquered and peopled half the world in a fit of absence of mind. That didn’t mean quite what it seemed to say: what Seeley meant was that there had not been a coherent
-  policy behind Britain’s imperial expansion. There had been an incoherent set of policies. The 1950 paper explained that the collection of islands and peninsulas was assembled to protect trade and the sea routes. The motive for Empire was selfish… the motivation consisted of desires which interlock
- ance of the subsidiary troops. In addition, large contributions were realised by Lord Hastings, Lord Amherst, and Lord William Bentinck for purposes entirely unconnected with the affairs of Awadh. In 1819, the Nawab was given the title and status of a king. Lord Dalhousie directed Sleeman, the Resident in Awadh, to make a tour throughout the state and ascertain the actual situation by personal inspect
- ion. The resident submitted a report describing the anarchical condition in the state. He was succeeded as resident in 1854 by Outram who submitted a report supporting that of his predecessor. Dalhousie hesitated to take the extreme step, i.e., annexation; he preferred permanent British administration, with the Nawab reta
- ining his titles and rank. But the Court of Directors ordered annexation and abolition of the throne (1856). Wajid Ali Shah refused to sign a treaty giving away his rights, and was exiled to Calcutta. It was a political blunder for which the British had to pay a heavy price during the Revolt of 1857. an I
- vassal on account of ‘lapse’ (i.e., leaving no issue as heir) were rather rare. Maharaja Ranjit Singh had annexed a few of his feudatory principalities on account of ‘lapse’. Likewise, the Company in 1820 acquired a few petty Cis-Sutlej states on the absence of heirs. Nonetheless, there was no clear-cut instance of an adopted son being deprived of an entire state or of such a state being regarded as a
-  ‘lapse’. Though this policy is attributed to Lord Dalhousie (1848–56), he was not its originator. It was a coincidence that during his governor-generalship several important cases arose in which the ‘Doctrine’ could be applied. Dalhousie showed too much zeal in enf
-  matter of chance that during Lord Dalhousie’s term many rulers of states died without a male issue and seven states were annexed under the Doctrine of Lapse. The most important of these were Satara (1848), Jhansi, and Nagpur (1854). The other small states included Jaitpur (Bundelkhand), Sambhalpur (Orissa), and Baghat (Himachal Pradesh). Lord Dalhousie annexed Awadh in 1856 after deposing Nawab Wajid
-  Ali Shah on grounds of misgovernment. Thus, Dalhousie annexed eight states during his eightyear tenure (1848–56) as governor general. In these eight years, he annexed some quarter million square miles of the territory of India. His reign almost completed the process of expansion of British power in India, w


- hich began with the victory over Siraj-ud-Daulah at Plassey in 1757. Relations of British India with Neighbouring Countries The desire of the British imperialists to consolidate their administrative and political power in the region led them into conflict with countr
- ies neighbouring India. Anglo-Bhutanese Relations The occupation of Assam in 1826 brought the British into close contacts with the mountain state of Bhutan. Frequent raids by Bhutanese into adjoining territories in Assam and Bengal and the bad treatment meted out to Elgin’s envoy 
- in 1863–64 and the treaty imposed on him, by which the British were forced to surrender the passes leading to Assam, led to British annexation of these passes and the stopping of allowance paid to the Bhutan
- ese. In 1865, the Bhutanese were forced to surrender the passes in return for an annual subsidy. It was the surrendered district which became a productive area with tea gardens.  
-  Anglo-Nepalese Relations The Gorkhas wrested control of Nepal from the successors of Ranjit Malla of Bhatgaon in 1760. They began to expand their dominion beyond the mountains. They found it easier to expand in the southern direction, as the north was well defended by the Chinese. In 1801, the English annexed Gorakh
- pur, which brought the Gorkhas’ boundary and the Company’s boundary together. The conflict started due to the Gorkhas’ capture of Butwal and Sheoraj in the period of Lord Hastings (1813–23). The war ended in the Treaty of Sagauli in 1816, which was in favour of the British. As per the treaty, ● Nepal accepted a British resident. ● Nepal ceded the districts of Garhwal and Kumaon, and
- ufactures in Burma and the need to check French ambitions in Burma and the rest of South-East Asia, resulted in three Anglo-Burmese Wars, and in the end, the annexation of Burma into British India in 1885. First Burma War (1824–26) The first war with Burma was fought when the Burmese expansion westwards and occupation of Arakan and Manipur, and the threat to Assam and the Brahmaputra Valley led to con
-  century. The British expeditionary forces occupied Rangoon in May 1824 and reached within 72 km of the capital at Ava. Peace was established in 1826 with the Treaty of Yandabo, which provided that the Government of Burma: ● pay one crore rupees as war compensation; ● cede its coastal provinces of Arakan and Tenasserim; ● abandon claims on Assam, 
- Jaintia; ● recognise Manipur as an independent state; ● negotiate a commercial treaty with Britain; and ● accept a British resident at Ava while posting a Burmese envoy at Calcutta. Second Burma War (1852) The second war was the result of the British commercial need and the imperialist policy of Lord Dalhousie. The British merchants were keen to get hold of timber resources of upper Burma and also sou
- h occupied Pegu, the only remaining coastal province of Burma. An intense guerrilla resistance had to be overcome before complete British control of lower Burma could be established. Third Burma War (1885) After the death of Burmese King Bhindan, his son Thibaw succeeded to the throne. Thibaw, from the beginning itself, was hostile towards the British. The British merchants at Rangoon and lower Burma 
- nflict with the French in Niger, Egypt, and Madagascar. A humiliating fine had been imposed on a British timber company by Thibaw. Dufferin ordered the invasion and final annexation of upper Burma in 1885. [The British had to face a strong guerrilla uprising in the whole of Burma soon after, and a nationalist movement after the First World War. The Burmese nationalists joined hands with the Indian Nat


- ional Congress. To weaken this link, Burma was separated from India in 1935. The Burmese  
-  nationalist movement further intensified under U Aung San during the Second World War, which finally led to the independence of Burma on January 4, 1948.] Anglo-Tibetan Relations Tibet was ruled by a theocracy of Buddhist monks (lamas) under nominal suzerainty of China. The British efforts to establish friendly and commercial relations with Tibet had
- band on a special mission to Tibet to oblige the Tibetans to come to an agreement. The Tibetans refused to negotiate and offered non-violent resistance. Younghusband pushed his way into Lhasa (August 1904) while the Dalai Lama fled. Treaty of Lhasa (1904) Younghusband dictated terms to the Tibetan officials which provided that: ● Tibet would pay an indemnity of 75 lakh rupees at the rate of one lakh r
-  Russia, the treaty was revised reducing the indemnity from Rs 75 lakh to Rs 25 lakh and providing for evacuation of Chumbi valley after three years (the valley was actually evacuated only in January 1908). Significance Only China gained in the end out of the whole affair because the Anglo-Russian convention of 1907  
- reased Russian influence in Persia replaced British influence and thwarted an English scheme for establishment of a new route by River Euphrates to India. Especially after the Treaty of Turkomanchai (1828), the English got alarmed about possible Russian plans regarding India. Soon, there was a search for a scientific frontier from the Indian side. Passes of the north-west seemed to hold the key to ent
- er India. The need was felt for Afghanistan to be under control of a ruler who would be friendly to the British. Forward Policy of Auckland Auckland who came to India as the governor general in 1836, advocated a forward policy. This implied that the Company government in India itself had to take initiatives to protect the boundary of British India from a probable Russian attack. This objective w
- ch the British government in India rejected. Dost Mohammed now turned to Russia and Persia for help. This prompted the British government to go ahead with the forward policy, and a Tripartite Treaty (1838) was entered into by the British, the Sikhs, and Shah Shuja (who had been deposed from the Afghan throne in 1809 and had been living since then as a British pensioner at Ludhiana). The treaty provide
-  ● Shah Shuja recognise the Sikh ruler, Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s claims over the Afghan territories on the right bank of the River Indus. First Anglo-Afghan War (1839–42) Soon after the tripartite treaty of 1838, there came about a drastic change in the political situation of the region because of the removal of the original irritants—Persia lifted its siege of He
- rat, and Russia recalled its envoy from Kabul. Nevertheless, the British decided to go ahead with their forward policy. This resulted in the First Afghan War (1839– 42). The British intention was to establish a permanent barrier against schemes of aggression from the north-west. An English army entered triumphantly into Kabul (August 1839) after a successful at
- tack. Most of the tribes had already been won over by bribes. Dost Mohammed surrendered (1840), and Shah Shuja was made the Amir of Afghanistan. But Shah Shuja was unacceptable to the Afghans. As soon as the British withdrew, the Afghans rose in rebellion, killing the garrison commander in Ka



- bul. The British were compelled to sign a treaty (1841) with the Afghan chiefs by which they agreed to evacuate Afghanistan and restore Dost Mohammed. But the English plan failed. Under a new expedition, the British re-occupied Kabul in September 1842, b
- ecognised him as the independent ruler of Afghanistan. The First Afghan War cost India about 1.5 crore rupees and nearly 20,000 men. John Lawrence and the Policy of Masterly Inactivity John Lawrence (1864–69) started a policy of masterly inactivity, which was a reaction to the disasters of the First Afghan War and an outcome of practical common sense and an intimate knowledge of the frontier problem a
- nd of Afghan passion for independence. Even when Dost Mohammed died in 1863, there was no interference in the war of succession. Lawrence’s policy rested on the fulfilment of two conditions:  
- li established himself on the throne, Lawrence tried to cultivate friendship with him. Lytton and the Policy of Proud Reserve Lytton, a nominee of the Conservative government under Benjamin Disraeli (1874–80), became the Viceroy of India in 1876. He started a new foreign policy of ‘proud reserve’, which was aimed at having scientific frontiers and safeguarding ‘spheres of influence’. According to Lytt
- on, the relations with Afghanistan could no longer be left ambiguous. Second Anglo-Afghan War (1870–80) Lytton made an offer of a favourable treaty to Sher Ali, but the Amir wanted friendship with both his powerful neighbours, Russia and British India, while keeping both of them at an arm’s length.
- ans. Lytton was displeased, and when the Russians withdrew their envoy from Kabul, Lytton decided to invade Afghanistan. Sher Ali fled in face of the British invasion, and the Treaty of Gandamak (May 1879) was signed with Yakub Khan, the eldest son of Sher Ali. Treaty of Gandamak (May 1879) The treaty signed after the Second-Anglo Afghan War provided that: ● the Amir conduct his foreign policy with th
- mberment of Afghanistan, but could not carry it out. Ripon abandoned this plan and decided on a policy of keeping Afghanistan as a buffer state. [After the First World War and the Russian Revolution (1917), the Afghans demanded full independence. Habibullah (who succeeded Abdur Rahman in 1901) was killed in 1919 and the new ruler Amamullah declared open war on the British. Peace came in 1921 when Afgh
-  India and the North-West Frontier Successive Indian rulers tried to reach out to this region lying between the Indus and Afghanistan in their search for a scientific frontier. The conquest of Sindh (1843) and annexation of Punjab (1849) carried British boundaries beyond the Indus and brought them in contact with Baluch and Pathan tribes, who were mostly independent, but the Amir of Afghanistan claime


- d nominal suzerainty over them. During 1891–92 the British occupation of Hunza and Nagar in Gilgit Valley, which were passes commanding communications with Chitral, alarmed Abdur Rahman (Amir of Afghanistan). A compromise was finally reached b
- y drawing a boundary line known as Durand Line between Afghan and British territories. Amir received some districts, and his subsidy was increased. But the Durand Agreement (1893) failed to keep peace and soon there were tribal uprisings. To check these, a permanent British garrison was established at Chitral and troops posted to guard Malakand Pass, but tribal uprisings cont
- inued till 1898. Curzon, the viceroy between 1899 and 1905, followed a policy of withdrawal and concentration. British troops withdrew from advanced posts, which were replaced by tribal levies, trained and commanded by British officers. He also encouraged th
- of the lieutenant-governor of Punjab). Overall, Curzon’s policies resulted in a peaceful north-west frontier. The peaceful conditions continued thereafter with occasional tribal uprisings. In January 1932, it was announced that the NWFP was to be constituted as a governor’s province. Since 1947, the province belongs to Pakistan. Summary Factors Which Gave Success to British in India Superior Arms Mili
- line Brilliant Leadership (which did not bother about adopting unscrupulous practices) Financial Strength Nationalist Pride Conflict Between English and Nawabs of Bengal ● Battle of Plassey (June 23, 1757): Robert Clive’s victory over Siraj-ud-Daulah laid the territorial foundation of British rule in India. ● Battle of Buxar (1764): Clive’s victory over the combined armies of Nawab of Bengal, Nawab of
-  Awadh, and the Mughal Emperor at Buxar laid the real foundation of the English power ● Treaty of Allahabad (1765): Granted the Diwani Rights of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa to the English. (i) Treaty with Nawab of Awadh (ii) Treaty with Shah Alam II, Mughal Emperor ● Dual Government—1765–72 British Conquest of Mys
- ore ● First Anglo-Mysore War (1767–69); Treaty of Madras ● Second Anglo-Mysore War (1779–1784); Treaty of Mangalore ● Third Anglo-Mysore War (1790–92); Treaty of Seringapatam ● Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799); Mysore is conquered by British forces Anglo-Maratha Struggle for Supremacy ● First Anglo-Maratha War (1775–82); Treaty of Surat (1775), T
- reaty of Purandhar (1776), and Treaty of Salbai (1782) ● Second Anglo-Maratha War (1803–05); Treaty of Bassein, 1802  
-  ● Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817–19) ● Causes for the defeat of the Marathas (i) Inept leadership (ii) Defective nature of state (iii) Loose political set-up (iv) Inferior military system (v) Ustable economic policy (vi) Superior En
- glish diplomacy and espionage (vii) Progressive English outlook Conquest of Sindh (1843) ● Lord Ellenborough was the Governor General of India Conquest of Punjab ● Treaty of Amritsar (1809), Ranjit Singh, and the British ● First Anglo-Sikh War (1845–46) ● Second Anglo-Sikh War (1848–49) British Paramountcy in Action ● Ring-fence Policy of Warren Hastings Subsidiary Alliance of Wellesle
- y ● Subsidised States: Hyderabad (1798; 1800) Mysore (1799) Tanjore (October 1799) Awadh (November 1801) Peshwa (December 1801) Bhonsle of Berar (December 1803) Sindhia (February 1804) Jodhpur (1818) Jaipur (1818) Macheri (1818) Bundi (1818) Bharatpur (1818) Doctrine of Lapse ● Lapsed States under Lord Dalhousie (1848-56) Satara (1848) Sambhalpur (1849) Baghat (1850) Udaipur (1854) Nagpur (1854)
-  Jhansi (1854) Awadh (1856; on charge of mal-administration)  
-  Relations of British India with Neighbouring Countries ● Anglo-Nepal Relations (Treaty of Sagauli, 1816) ● Anglo-Burma Relations First Anglo-Burma War, 1824–26 Second Anglo-Burma War, 1852 Third Anglo-Burma War, 1885 ● Anglo-Tibetan Relations Treaty of Lhasa (1904) ● Anglo-Afghan Relations Forward Policy of Auckland First Anglo-Afghan War (1839–1842) John Lawrence’s Policy of Masterly 
- Inactivity Lytton and the Policy of Proud Reserve Second Anglo-Afghan War (1870–80) Treaty of Gandamak (May 1879) ● North-West Frontier Durand Agreement (1893)  
- 